# Regular Meeting

- **Date:** January 10, 2022
- **Time:** 5:00pm 
    - 4:15pm reception
    - 4:45pm swearing-in
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda PDF](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20220110.pdf)
- [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/3K9jrkL4mCM)
- [Our Agenda Transcription](#/view/agenda~2022~transcription~01-10_RM)

## Details

- Sign Up to Speak is available from 12/31/21 to 1/4/22.
- Agenda is out on 1/6 around 5pm.
- Indira's first meeting a Ward 1 Council Member.
- Proclamation: Human Trafficking Prevention and Awareness Month

## Hearing Items

### Item 44: EMC Downtown Park Lease

Lease Agreement with EMC (Employers Mutual Casualty Company) for lease of real estate &
park improvements.
The potential park is located at 701 Walnut Street for use by Parks & Rec Deptartment as a public park.

The city would be "renting" the public park from EMC for a "limited duration". The city will pay $140,650 in rent over 10 years and repairs & replacement up to $25,000 per year. This
totals around $39,065 per year.

Park construction is expected to be complete in September of 2022.

The park will be named "EMC Downtown Park". EMC will have the right to exclusive use of the entire park up to 12 times a year.

The city will provide security "consistent with security provided at similar parks". EMC may provide
additional security.

[Council Communication](https://councildocs.dsm.city/Communications/2022/22-003.pdf)

### Item 45: EMC Downtown Park Rezoning

Request from EMC (Employers Mutual Casualty Company) to rezone an area from 
DX1 Downtown District to P2 Public Civic and Institutional District for
"EMC Downtown Park" related to Item 44.

### Item 46

Request from Mid-Eastern Council on Chemical Abuse to rezoning 3451 Easton Boulevard
from Low Density Residential to Neighborhood Mixed Used, 
to allow for a Group Living use of the Property for expansion of an existing outpatient 
rehab facility and provision of overnight stay accommodations for patients.

## Consent Items

### Item #20

Cownie, Mandelbaum, Sheumaker to Homeless Coordinating Council

### Item 23

Gatto & Sheumaker to Metro Waste Authority

### Item 25

Sheumaker to the IMPACT Community Action Partnership

### Item 27 

Fishy, Drake development

### Item 29

Appeal of site plan for Shelden Holdings

### Item 30

Appeal of site plan for Glad Tidings Assembly of God Church

### Item 37

Public Nuisances

### Item 38

Homeland Security

### Item 39

Homeland Security

### Item 40

Vacant homes

### Item 43

Youth Advisory Board

## Other Items

### Item #1: Annual Appointments

#### 1I. Reappointments

The Council will vote to reappoint:

- A. City Manager, Scott Sanders
- B. City Attorney, Jeff Lester
- C. City Clerk, P. Kay Cmelik
- D. 
    - Chief Deputy City Clerk, Laura Baumgartner
    - Deputy City Clerk, Linda Main
- E. 
    - Chief Deputy City Attorney, Lawrence McDowell & Carol Moser 
    - Deputy City Attorneys, Kathleen Vanderpool, Carol Moser, & Thomas G. Fisher, Jr
    - Assistant Attorneys, Luke DeSmet, Ann DiDonato, Thomas G. Fisher Jr., 
        Glenna Frank, John Haraldson, Shellie Mackel, Meg Norberg, Judy Parks-Kruse, 
        Douglas Philiph, Molly Tracy & Lisa Wieland

#### 1II. Mayor Pro Tem

Mayor Cownie is appointing Josh Mandelbaum to Mayor Pro Tem for 2022.

### Item 48: Public Reports

Requests to speak from 6 people.
