# Regular Meeting

- **Date:** January 24, 2022
- **Time:** 5:00pm 
    - 4:45pm Proclamation: Black History Month
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda PDF](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20220124.pdf?pdf=Agenda&t=1642721054389)
- [Our Agenda Transcription](#/view/agenda~2022~transcription~01-24_RM)
- [Meeting Notes](https://dsm-document-archive.netlify.app/assets/meeting-notes/council/01_24_22_regular-meeting.pdf)

## Details

- Sign Up to Speak is available from 1/14/22 to 1/18/22 at 5pm.
- Agenda is out on 1/20 around 5pm.
- A major Rules Change went through to restrict the public & Indira, without public comment, and passed 6-1.
- For the first time in months, council brought the Metro STAR SWAT team to city hall to police the meeting, consisting
of at least 8 cops.
- Members of the public pointed out a conflict of interest involving Connie Boesen and others, but no action was
taken by the city.
- People with Des Moines People's Town Hall announced a virtual event on 1/27/22 at 7pm.
- Council used an Overflow area in the great hall, instead of allowing everyone who showed up in the room,
even though there was no posted capacity rule and empty chairs in the room
- Council appears to have worked with CISS to turn people out in some effort to push back on the call for a 
24 hour warming center
- Gatto made a racist comment to the effect of "All businesses matter" after council passed a motion for a Black-owned business
- Kay blocked 3 members of the public who had signed up from speaking.

## Agenda Items

### Item 1i

Amending the procedural rules of the Des Moines City Council.

### Consent Item 13

Approving 50 Tax Abatement applications in bulk.

### Consent Item 18

Support for the Merle Hay Mall Campus Reinvestment District.

### Consent Item 19

Approving business for golf courses.

### Consent Item 20

DMPD "drug control" funding.

### Consent Item 21

DMPD agreement between the City of Des Moines & Central Iowa 
Traffic Safety Task Force.

### Consent Item 22

Bulk purchase of furniture for city buildings.

### Item 24

Final reading of Youth Advisory Board Ordinance.

### Hearing Item 26

Appeal of plan denial by Shelden Holdings, LLC.

### Hearing Item 27

Appeal of plan denial by Glad Tidings Assembly of God Church.

### Hearing Item 28

Request from Drake University.

### Hearing Item 29

Funding repairs for parking garages.

### Hearing Item 35

Issues with Pool Painting contracts, closing the Hearing.

### Item 37

Public reports from 9 people.
