# Regular Meeting

- **Date:** February 7, 2022
- **Time:** 5:00pm 
    - 4:45pm Proclamations:
        - American Heart Month 
        - Transit Equity Day 
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda PDF](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20220207.pdf?pdf=Agenda&t=1643936058512)
- [Our Agenda Transcription](#/view/agenda~2022~transcription~02-07_RM)
- [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/Hb3k7D-THx4)

## Details

- Sign Up to Speak is available from 1/28/22 to 2/1/22 at 5pm.
- Agenda is out on 2/3 around 5pm.
- Of 15 speakers we know who registered, 6 (40%) were left off the agenda.

### CONSENT ITEM #6 & 7: Animal Control Facility Construction & Services

- Item 6 is $9,445,000 for several bid packages for the construction of a new Animal Control Facility
- Item 7 is $876,883 for “advisor services” for Animal Control Facility project
- Dana Wingert is listed first as submitting the items as “Animal Care and Control” is under DMPD purview
- Bid process has been historically problematic and is an issue here considering this total project is almost $11 million
    - No assurances that livable wages will be paid
    - No union requirements
    - No process to ensure bidding from a diverse group of contractors
    - No requirements to ensure we aren’t negatively impacting the environment with construction or the finished project
    - Council has claimed they want to “improve” this process but has yet to take any action
- Is this the biggest issue facing Animal Control? How are our employees being compensated and are we adequately staffed?
    - Note: I have (Taylor) personally had less than stellar results when dealing with Animal Control for bat removal within the last year.
- Animal welfare take to this: Definitely a large amount of this money is going to things that will directly be used with animals, (e.g. item 6k - kennels and cat cages). None of these agenda items suggest the bidders remotely considered animal welfare standards in proposing materials, design, or any other specifications. The agenda items only refer to “contract documents” which are not part of the public record. The public is entitled to the information in order to fully participate in the public hearing scheduled for 2/7. Animal control impounds numerous licensed, lost pets who are legal property of Des Moines residents. Therefore Des Moines residents have a vested interest in the materials used and the design plans for the animal control improvements being meticulously reviewed to adhere to best practices for animal care according to American Veterinary Medical Association standards. 
    - (same re item 7 and qualifications of the Weitz company to ensure animal welfare)

### CONSENT ITEM #8: Des Moines Levee Alterations (Water Trails Project)

- $95,600 additional for an already bloated $125 million water trails project
- At the last working session, council admitted that the water is not clean enough for recreational activities, but are still moving forward with the project
- It has been recently reported that the fundraising for the project is stalled and council also admitted that we are draining private donors for this project
- There are no assurances that there won’t need to be additional funding as this project progresses

### CONSENT ITEM #10: Stream Mitigation Credits

- Spending $245,275 to buy 4,905.5 “stream mitigation credits” from Ft Dodge
- Credits are required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act when there is a negative impact by a project 
    - [EPA reference](https://www.epa.gov/cwa-404/permit-program-under-cwa-section-404#:~:text=Overview,the%20United%20States%2C%20including%20wetlands.)
- From the EPA reference “Section 404 requires a permit before dredged or fill material may be discharged into waters of the United States”
- At a time when water quality is at an all time low, we are choosing to make “the most economical option for this project” at the recommendation of city staff, instead of choosing an option that has the least environmental impact

### CONSENT ITEM #12i: Iowa DNR Grant

- Spending $300,000 for Beaverdale Park Woodland Restoration
- Project includes select tree thinning, invasive species removal, prescribed fire management, constructing storm water management
- No report/mention of potential impact to our houselses community
- From council communication “Such efforts will also support future implementation of park improvements, which were requested by the Beaverdale Neighborhood Association.”

### CONSENT ITEM #14: Market District Plans

- Declaring the subdivision of “The Market District”
- The District Developer, LLC who is in charge of the district project is a conglomeration of James Cownie and Mid-American Energy

### CONSENT ITEM #15: Plan and Zoning Commission Appointment

- Recommendation from Councilmember Gatto to appoint Leah Rudolphi to the Plan and Zoning Commission, Seat 14, to fill a vacancy with a term ending on June 30, 2026.

### CONSENT ITEM #16: Access Advisory Board Appointment

- Recommendation from Councilmember Westergaard to appoint Garland Armstrong to the Access Advisory Board, seat 5, for the remaining four months of the present term and for a full four-year term starting June 14, 2022 and ending on June 14, 2026.

### CONSENT ITEM #16i: Civil & Human Rights Commission Appointment

- Recommendation from Des Moines Civil and Human Rights Commission to appoint Aayliyah Battle, replacing Stacey Berry, as their youth member appointee to the Community Policing and Code Enforcement Policy and Practice Review Committee.

### CONSENT ITEM #17: Vacation for Iowa Power & Light Company

- Iowa Power and Light Company is operated by MidAmerican Energy under the City’s Franchise Agreement 
    - (Des Moines Municipal Code, Appendix C, Section 1; Appendix D, Section 1). 
- This vacation is to clear “undeveloped” land to “facilitate the expansion of the MidAmerican Facility.” 
- The amount of the land in this “undeveloped roadway easement” is over 53,000/53k square feet. The area is currently zoned an I2 Industrial District. 

### CONSENT ITEM #21: Setting Hearing on South of Gray's Lake Plan

- Setting date of hearing to Feb 21st for public hearing on “South of Gray’s Lake” Master Plan
- Where is the public document for PlanDSM?

### CONSENT ITEM #26: Setting Hearing on Reducing Bike Path & Sidewalk Requirements at for Airport Business Park

- Setting date of hearing to Feb 21st for public hearing on rezoning
- Why the reduction in Bike Path width requirements?
- From these documents, there seems to be no statement for why the width reduction is being asked for.
- With all the talk of accessibility of the city, wider sidewalks make for safer/easier travel for all, regardless if it is considered a “business district”

### CONSENT ITEM #28: Homeland Security Funding

- Dana Wingert requesting acceptance of the 2019 Reallocation Homeland Security grant award for the 
Explosive Ordnance Detection (EOD) Task Force. ($206,888)
    - [Communications](http://www.dmgov.org/Government/CityCouncil/Communications/22-041.pdf)
    - [Resolution](http://www.dmgov.org/government/CityCouncil/Resolutions/20220207/28.pdf)
    - [Homeland Security Info](https://homelandsecurity.iowa.gov/programs/special-teams/)
- $206,888 in Homeland Security grants that DMPD reallocates to state EOD Task Force
- This money is widely scoped and nothing in the item details specifically what this money will be used for
- Description of the funds usage - “The 2019 Reallocation Homeland Security grant will provide critical equipment for the statewide EOD teams so they may remain prepared to support federal initiatives and maintain statewide response to terrorism, explosive devices, and public safety. The purchased equipment will allow the EOD teams to maintain their efficient effectiveness while remaining compliant with national requirements for federal certification.”

### CONSENT ITEM #30: Plan for Capital City Reinvestment District

- The entirety of this district is owned by just 3 developers
- District looks gerrymandered because it is required to be continuous acres
- The proposed projects in this district are the soccer stadium, a parking garage and 2 hotels
- This will presumably pass regardless, so we should demand the area be expanded to the areas in between these blocks to develop actual quality of life projects
- The city has an opportunity to get things like public restrooms and other aspects added to this area

### CONSENT ITEM #33, 34, & 35: Authorizing Redemption of General Obligations from 2014

- 33 - $24,945,000 in General Obligation Bonds ($16,480,000 to be redeemed June 1, 2022)
- 34 - $2,250,000 in General Obligation Urban Renewal Bonds ($540,000 to be redeemed June 1, 2022)
- 35 - $27,465,000 in General Obligation Refunding Capital Loan Notes ($7,850,000 to be redeemed June 1, 2022)

### CONSENT ITEM #36: Abating "Public Nuisances"

- Abating 4 "public nuisances"

### CONSENT ITEM #38: Acquisition of PPE for Fire Department

- Acquisition of new fire coats and pants to not exceed $500,000 for fiscal year 2022
- Is this adequate funding? The city has historically been underfunding the fire department and under paying its workers.

### HEARING ITEM #41: Property Tax Levy

- Increase of $0.05 per $1,000 assessed
- Reason given for increase is “increases in employee expenses, health costs, and compensation, higher costs of contracts and services, and proposed targeted staffing increases.”
- Expected hearing date for budget is March 7th

#### People’s Context

- This increase may be warranted, but considering the cities inability to adequately receive public input, it would be good to see what more this would be used for besides essentially “higher costs”

### HEARING ITEM #42: TIF District

- Hearing, Resolution, First and Final consideration of the ordinance
- The proposed Urban Renewal Area is approximately 77-acres and is located generally east of Drake University, between Forest Avenue, Martin Luther King Jr Parkway, University Avenue, and 25th Street, with additional parcels north of Forest Avenue and south of University Avenue. The plan area includes property that Drake University proposes to sell to a developer.
- There is one (1) project identified in the plan: a mixed-use project consisting of approximately 115 dwelling units and approximately 11,000 square feet of commercial space.

#### People’s Context

- The affordability of the identified project is not actually affordable for the units (was shown at P&Z meeting in January)
- There is no language to ensure that we don’t gentrify this area, prioritize projects for the public good, just generating tax dollars
- With the resolution, we are again denoting this area as “blighted”

#### Resolution Language

- The Carpenter Urban Renewal Area constitutes a blighted area.
- The Carpenter Urban Renewal Area constitutes an economic development area
appropriate for redevelopment for residential and commercial use
- That the rehabilitation, convservation, redevelopment, development,
or a combination thereof, of the Carpenter Urban Renewal Area is necessary 
in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the City of Des Moines

### HEARING ITEM #43: Glad Tidings Assembly of God Church Plan Appeal

- On appeal from Glad Tidings Assembly of God Church (Owner) represented by Bill Wenig (Officer) concerning the denial of a Type 2 Design Alternative for Site Plan for the property at 2145 East Army Post Road.
- Council must choose one of two:
    - Alternative A: Deny & Approve the Type 2 Design Alternative
    - Alternative B: Approve the proposed Type 2 Design Alternatives in form requested by the owner
- Oddly, there doesn’t appear to be a council communication attachment with this item even though it’s fairly complicated.
- Appeal is seeking to fully or partially waive the front yard & side yard surface parking lot restrictions in the front yard along primary frontages as described in Municipal Code.
- Planning & Zoning Commission voted 8-3 for DENIAL of the requested Type 2 Design Alternative to waive or modify said ordinance requirements

### HEARING ITEM #44: 2022 Skywalk Bridge Structural Repair Program

- On 2022 Skywalk Bridge Structural Repair Program
- Contracting with GTG Construction, LLC, (Tracy D. Grasso, Owner) for $59,000

#### People’s Context

- This relates to a lot of the recent skywalk issues, such as one of the public Kirkwood entrances being locked.

### HEARING ITEM #45: 2nd Avenue Bridge

- On 2nd Avenue Bridge over the Des Moines River, Structural Rehabilitation
- On 2nd Avenue Bridge over Birdland Drive, Replacement
- Contracting with Jasper Construction Services, Inc. (Cliff Rhoads, President) for $9,983,440.85.

#### People’s Context

- Only 1 bid was received and bid was $1.5 million over city’s estimate
- No mention of walkability/accessibility improvements are mentioned in the items being improved/rebuilt

### HEARING ITEM #46: SW 9th Street Bridge Replacement

- On SW 9th Street Bridge Replacement over Middle South Creek
- Contracting with Herberger Construction Company, Inc. (Dean Herberger, President) for $1,987,042.24
- This project provides the replacement of the structurally deficient bridge on SW 9th Street over Middle South Creek. Original bridge was built in 1971 and is being replaced with a new 3-span concrete slab bridge. 

#### People’s Context

- Only 1 bid received and $150,000 over city’s estimate

### HEARING ITEM #47: Chesterfield Park Water Playground and Improvements

- On Chesterfield Park Water Playground and Improvements.
- Contracting with Caliber Concrete, LLC (Jason Martin, Owner) for $1,875,639.77.
- Includes construction of a splash pad, playground, basketball court, futsal court, shelter, PCC walking path, parking lot, shetler, and renovated restrooms 
- Project has exceeded the engineers estimate by over $100,000
- Mixed funding includes a $200,000 Land and Water Conservation fund Grant administered by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources

#### People’s Context

- Multiple items to repair/maintain community pools and splash pads have been rejected over the last several months because of an inability to fill those bids
- What will the maintenance of this park look like and are we expected to be able to maintain it better than recent failed bids? Why?

### HEARING ITEM #48: Ingersoll Avenue Streetscape

- On Ingersoll Avenue Streetscape from 28th Street to Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway (south side). 
- Contracting with Jasper Construction Services, Inc. (Cliff Rhoads, President) for $5,258,518.95.
- Corridor will be enhanced to improve safety “with a raised and protected one-way cycle track on each side of the street”.
- Includes construction of permeable pavers and storm sewer.

#### People’s Context
- No mention of accessibility requirements for streetscape
- No mention of ensuring we are not implementing anti-houseless architecture 

### Item #49: Public Works Stormwater Infrastructure Advisory Committee

- This is the above committee’s report about their activities. It says a lot of nonsense about how they held meetings and spent money, but at these meetings, they discussed things like “they were also engaged with the discussion on the watershed prioritization criteria that was developed in Phase 1 of the [city-wide stormwater] master plan that will be the basis of the Phase 2 work” and “The committee wanted to commend City Council on their support of stormwater projects over the past 5 years. Over $114,000,000 in stormwater funded projects were completed during that time period. Those included … Flood Mitigation/Levee Program Improvements,… and several City-Wide Stormwater Improvement Projects. 
- This is code for this is the committee that decided which properties to buy first for “stormwater improvement” and bought the poor Four-Mile Creek properties but not the rich ones. (The City Engineer at that time testified the plan was to buy out the rich properties “eventually” but no schedule had been set, and that it had been determined as part of the above plan to buy the properties in question.) 
    - See [DSM register story](https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/local/des-moines/2021/10/05/des-moines-city-council-approves-land-acquisition-along-fourmile-creek-polk-county-dmpd-body-cameras/5886918001/)
- See Advisory Committee Meeting agenda including item number seven: 7. 48th and Holcomb Sewer Backup Response and Public Education 
    - [(meeting to discuss stormwater response in same four-mile creek neighborhood)](https://cms2files.revize.com/desmoines/202010216-Stormwater%20Infrastructure%20Advisory%20Committee%20Agenda%20-%20Final.pdf?pdf=Agenda&t=1642118400059&pdf=Agenda&t=1642118400059)

### ITEM #50: PUBLIC SPEAKERS

- 9 speakers. At least 15 requested to speak, 6 were left off.
    -    (A) James Grimm
    -    (B) Tyler Bainter
    -    (C) Natalie Harwood
    -    (D) Jolene Prescott
    -    (E) Larry James
    -    (F) Paden Sheumaker
    -    (G) Denver Foote
    -    (H) Katelyn Sethi
    -    (I) Molly Arndt
