# Work Session

- **Date:** September 12, 2022
- **Time:** 5:00pm
    - 4:45pm Municipal Housing Agency Governing Board Meeting
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20220912.pdf?pdf=Agenda&t=1662698502592)
- [Housing Agenda](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/mg20220912.pdf?pdf=Housing%20Agendas&t=1662698502592)
- [Corrections](https://councildocs.dsm.city/corrections/20220912%20CAP.pdf)
- [YouTube](https://youtu.be/vdzLRITEd_U)
- [Details](https://www.dsm.city/citycouncil_detail_T60_R2072.php)
- [Our Agenda Transcription](#/view/agenda~2022~transcription~09-12_RM)

## Notes

TBD

## Housing Items

- Approving City of Des Moines Municipal Housing Agency submittal of the
  Family Self Sufficiency (FSS) Program Coordinators grant application to
  the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
- Authorizing the Des Moines Municipal Housing Agency to negotiate with
  Greater Des Moines Habitat for Humanity, Inc. for the disposition sale of
  13 properties.

## Agenda Items

### Consent Item 15 // Emergency Nuisance Abatements

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/15.pdf

Levying assessments for costs of Nuisance Abatement-NAC Emergency Orders (Neighborhood Services), Schedule No. 2022-08. 

### Consent Item 16 // Tax Abatements in bulk worth $35,817,418

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-406.pdf

Approving one (1) tax abatement application and eighty-three (83) tax abatement applications for the additional value added by improvements completed in 2021 and 2022. 

### Consent Item 41 // Setting date of hearing for purchase of two Nissan Leaf electric vehicles 

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/41.pdf

On the proposition to authorize a lease purchase agreement in the principal amount not to exceed $50,000 for the purpose of acquiring certain items of equipment consisting of two Nissan Leaf electric vehicles, (10-3-22). 

Note: Usage of vehicles not provided?

### Consent Item 46 // City of Des Moines hiring lawyers to defend DMPD Peter Wilson and Jeffrey George

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/46.pdf

Approving retention of outside counsel.

From communication:

WHEREAS, Des Moines Police Officers Peter Wilson and Jeffrey George are involved in a lawsuit
in which the City of Des Moines is not a party, but in which there are issues to be litigated arising 
out of officers' official duties; and

WHEREAS, the City is obligated under Iowa Code Section 670.8 to defend its officers and employees; and

WHEREAS, the City's Legal Department is unable to provide representation in this matter
and it would therefore be in the best interest of the City to obtain outside counsel to 
represent Officers Wilson and George; and

WHEREAS, Attorneys Greg R. Brown and Joseph Gamble of Duncan, Green, Brown & Langeness, P.C. have agreed to represent the
officers only as to the pending counterclaims when Iowa Code 670.8 applies in the subject lawsuit.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Des Moines, Iowa:

That Greg R. Brown and Joseph Gamble of the law firm Duncan, Green, Brown and Langeness, P.C., 400 Locust Street,
Suite 380, Des Moines, Iowa 50309, be and are retained by the City of Des Moines
for the purpose of representing Des Moines Police Officers Peter Wilson and Jeffrey George in
defense of counterclaims when Iowa Code Section 670.8 applies in the subject lawsuit.
Such retention is at the rate of $250.00 per hour plus reasonable expenses.
The attorneys will provide detailed billing for such services and payment for such services
may be periodic with reports to the City Council of such payments on a quarterly basis.

Approved as to Form: Carol J. Moser, Deputy City Attorney (signed)

### Consent Item 47 // Mayor Cownie's Travel Funds $3,122

Submitting travel and training request for T.M. Franklin Cownie.

T.M. Franklin Cownie, Mayor (R-0), to Washington, DC and Miami, FL, September 13-17, 2022.

Traveling to Washington, DC to attend by invitation an event at the White House celebrating the
passage of the Inflation Reduction Act. Through his position as an international leader with ICLEI and
the City’s ambitious sustainability goals, he had a seat at the table and a voice in the discussion.

He will then travel to Miami, FL, to attend the Smart City Expo USA 2022 to learn about preparing
cities for tomorrow while solving urgent issues of today by harnessing $1 trillion of federal funds to
build inclusive and resilient cities through electrification.

While in Miami, he will also attend the United States Conference of Mayors fall executive committee
meeting. There he will have the opportunity to engage in peer-to-peer exchanges with other mayors on
common problems and solutions, while also providing sound strategies and effective tools to address
the City’s issues in an innovative and inclusive way.

The amended budget for travel and training in Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 is $753,146. The amount
expended for travel and training in FY2023, as of September 2, 2022, is $90,030.64.

### Consent Item 53 // Amending agreement with Global Atlantic Financial Company

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-401.pdf

Third amendment to the Iowa Economic Development Authority (IEDA) contract related to financial assistance for Accordia Life & Annuity Company a/k/a Global Atlantic Financial Company under the IEDA High Quality Jobs (HQJ) program. 

### Consent Item 54 // Terminating agreement with Meredith Corporation

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-400.pdf

Terminating the High Quality Jobs (HQJ) program agreement between the Iowa Economic Authority (IEDA), 
City of Des Moines, and Meredith Operations Corporation f/k/a as Meredith Corporation. 

### Consent Item 64e // Cellular Services for DMPD for $207,525

AT & T Mobility LLC, a subsidiary of AT & T Inc. (David Christopher, President) for annual cellular 
services and wireless transmission service, and the replacement of cellular phones per State of Iowa Agreement 
for use by the Police Department, total annual cost $207,525.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-394.pdf

### Consent Item 64k // Professional Assessment of DMPD policies, procedures, and training for $249,823

Exception to the procurement ordinance competitive bidding requirement for good cause and 
authorizing the negotiation and execution of an agreement with 21CP Solutions for consultant services 
for professional assessment of the Police Department's policies, procedures and training, $249,823.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-433.pdf

### Item 73 // Snow Disposal

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-393.pdf

Amending Chapter 42, Article VIII of the Municipal Code relating to the disposal of snow.

(A) Final consideration of ordinance above, (waiver requested by Jonathan Gano, Public Works Director) requires six votes. 

### Item 74 // Vacant Property Registration

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-395.pdf

Amending the Municipal Code by enacting Chapter 61 relating to Vacant Property Registration.

(A) Final consideration of ordinance above (waiver requested by SuAnn Donovan, Assistant Director, Neighborhood Services), requires six votes.

(B) Approving and adopting administrative fees for the Vacant Property Registration Ordinance. 

### Item 75 // 10 Public Speakers

### Extra Item 1 // Nationwide Agreement

1. Approving First Amendment to Urban Renewal Development Agreement with Nationwide
Mutual Insurance. Sponsors: Mayor Cownie and Council Member Mandelbaum.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-434.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/EX1.pdf

### Extra Item 2 // Nationwide Purchase

2. Approving Purchase and Sale Contract with Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company for the
purchase of 1200 Locust Street, 1200 Mulberry Street, and Assignment of Parking Lot Lease
at 13th Street and Walnut Street. Sponsors: Mayor Cownie and Council Member
Mandelbaum.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2022/22-435.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/EX2.pdf

### Extra Item 3 // Airport Conflict of Interest

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20220912/EX3.pdf

Approving waiver and consent to conflict of interest in representation by Ahlers & Cooney,
PC of the Des Moines Airport Authority as to an agreement between the Des Moines Airport 
Authority and the City of Des Moines for Borrow Site. 

From Resolution:

Sponsors: Mayor Cownie and Council Member Mandelbaum. 

WAIVER AND CONSENT TO CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN REPRESENTATION BY AHLERS &
COONEY, P.C. OF THE DES MOINES AIRPORT AUTHORITY AS TO AN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE DES MOINES AIRPORT AUTHORITY AND THE CITY OF DES MOENES FOR
BORROW SITE

WHEREAS, Ahlers & Cooney, P.C. represents the Des Moines Airport Authority (Authority) general
counsel and the City of Des Moines in various matters, including economic development matters and as
bond counsel; and

WHEREAS, the Authority and the City are considering entering into a Borrow Site Agreement to allow the
City to utilize fill material that is presently located on Authority property; and

WHEREAS, the Authority would like to use Ahlers & Cooney, P.C. for representation in the negotiation
and drafting of the Borrow Site Agreement which requires a consent and waiver as to the conflict from the
Authority and the City.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF DES MOINES, IOWA:

1. That it hereby authorizes and directs the Mayor to execute the waiver and consent to an actual,
potential or perceived conflict of interest associated with Ahlers & Cooney, P.C.'s representation of
the Des Moines Airport Authority in the Borrow Site Agreement between the Des Moines Airport
Authority and the City ofDes Moines.

2. That the City Attorney is authorized to withdraw and terminate such waiver and consent if the City
Attorney determines that negotiations or any issues related to the Borrow Site Agreement become
adversarial between the City and the Authority.

Sponsors: Mayor Cownie and Council Member Mandelbaum
