# Special Meeting

- **Date:** July 22, 2024
- **Time:** 7:30am "immediately following Work Session"
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20240722special.pdf)
- [Details](https://www.dsm.city/citycouncil_detail_T60_R2897.php)
- [Corrections]( https://councildocs.dsm.city/corrections/20240722%20CAP.pdf)
- [YouTube](https://youtube.com/live/Ggf1UHRTnOc)
- [Minutes](https://councildocs.dsm.city/minutes/as20240722%20special.pdf)

## Attention

This meeting violates Iowa Code 21.4 Public notice, which requires meetings to give notice of the "time, date, and place" of open meetings.

There is no time listed for the start of this meeting, instead it is listed as "immediately following Work Session"

## Notes

- Coleman alters agenda to move Item 7 before other items
- Boesen wants 30 minutes of public comment with alternating YEA and NAY speakers. This inflates the voice of YEA speakers, even though there were less of them there were given equal speaking time
- Item 7, a list of nonbinding suggestions. Boesen adds some more before discussion
    - Adding public restrooms to some parking garages
    - Hire 4 outreach workers for homeless population
    - Hire Hearing Officer to expedite legal processes
    - Boesen says that the ordinance will not be enforced until all these things are done by City Staff... then why pass it now? Bizarre
        - Mandelbaum asks about that. Apparently the city manager has verbally agreed to hold off on enforcement but it is nonbinding.
        - Coleman "agrees" with Mandelbaum's sentiment, says if the timeline gets messed up he will join with Mandelbaum in "frustration"
        - Gatto gets mad, as usual, without a point
    - Public Comment:
        - JOPPA brought many speakers, is asking for help housing more homeless people
        - one speaker says they were kicked out of their home for being queer and says there are not enough spaces for people. also mentions a relative who was a homeless veteran with mental health issues
        - one speaker calls out that we should not be placing the burden onto local nonprofit partners, it should be a regional collaborative effort
            - "I would never stay at CISS, its one step away from prison"
        - Angela Connolly, Polk County Supervisor, is first speaker to support ordinance. Personal friend of the Mayor. says she has been "obviously" "part of the Homeless Situation"
            - says she hates seeing tents, gets booed
        - another speaker brings up that homelessness heavily impacts LGBTQ+ people
            - mentions that the state wants landlords to be able to evict queer people, teachers to out them, etc.
        - The second supportive speaker has a Trump 2024 hat, and asks a question and gets an answer from council (they don't normally answer, always interesting to see who they answer)
            - Bizarre, the city shows images of trash while this speaker talks [clip](https://youtu.be/Ggf1UHRTnOc?t=2107)
        - HR of Flynn Wright, supportive, has odd story about someone being chased (this ordinance would not impact that in any way...)
        - ACLU strongly opposes this ordinance
        - NAACP opposes this ordinance, highlights the inconsistencies that came up during the work session (timeline was openly made arbitrarily, police and attorneys don't agree on the ordinance, etc)
            - points out the impact will hit Black people harder
        - Homeward wants city to slow down and take more community input to collaborate with community partners (nonprofits)
            - passing this will setup everyone for failure (bc its rushed, unclear, etc)
            - points out criminal charges could block people from receiving services
        - At the end, Boesen asks further comments be emailed
     - nonbinding resolution 7 passes unanimously
- Item 5
    - Immediately moved and seconded
    - Mandelbaum speaks
        - points out until that morning, they hadn't even had a council work session about this
        - no "needs discussion"
        - policy experts & homeless service providers were not engaged. providers were told Thursday about the changes on the agenda Monday. Points out for TIF changes developers are told 2 months in advance
        - homeless coordinating council has not had a meeting about these changes
        - Mandelbaum has not received a reason why this item was rushed into a special meeting at 7:30am. This is also a time when the city encourages vacation (City Manager, City Attorney, and Council Member Voss are all not present because of this)
    - Simonson speaks, also is not supporting ordinance for many of Mandelbaum's reasons. Says he didn't know about the fines until Wednesday. Says he may be convinced but the process has been bizarre, basically.
    - Boesen tries to cut discussion short again
    - Mandelbaum speaks again
        - Says the city is inviting (expensive) legal challenges
    - Two NO are Simonson and Mandelbaum, rest YES
- Item 6 
    - Mandelbaum speaks
        - Points out this is the item that criminalizes homelessness
        - This item does nothing to house even a single person
        - Says we should be making changes in more "measured ways"
        - None of the folks who work with homeless people would say this is an effective way to get people into shelters
        - At best, they move people around. At worst, they create more barriers to housing
        - Overly broad, overly punitive
        - Existing laws can be enforced before we criminalize folks for sleeping outside
        - Real solution to homelessness is housing
        - Years of inadequate housing work, need regional support
    - Coleman speaks
        - pats self on the back of council for housing... weird. Council has, by their own metrics, failed in terms of building housing.
        - says he has checked with CISS for the last "week or so", says they had capacity
    - Boesen speaks
        - "sense of urgency"
        - weird platitudes that don't make sense, reading from paper
    - Two NO are Simonson and Mandelbaum, rest YES
- Item 7
    - Chicken Ban
    - Mandelbaum speaks, again wants to slow down and find different solutions
        - they haven't had a work session to discuss this
    - Westergaard speaks, wants to make even more strict and for it to go into effect August 1st.
    - Boesen blocks public comment
- Council clearly moved two controversial item into this rush (homeless ban and rooster ban) to lump them together and complicate organizing & opposition

## Highlighted Items

### Item 5

Ordinance amending Sections 102-8, 102-615 and 3-23 of the Municipal Code relating to
abandoned property and the removal of encroachments.

Waiver requested by Scott Sanders

Reduces time to claim abandoned property from 90 to 30 days

Reduces encroachment removal notices from 10 to three days

Additional changes to Removal Without Notice, Pre-Removal Hearing, and Post-Removal Hearing

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/5.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/5a.pdf

### Item 6

Ordinance amending Chapter 102 of the Municipal Code relating to prohibited camping.

Waiver requested by Scott Sanders

Makes "camping" in public illegal, subject to $120 fine and immediate removal

Gives the city the ability to remove a "campsite" 24 hours after notice is given.
This seems to contradict item 5 which lowers the notice time from 10 to 3 days.

Gives the city the ability to "retain as evidence" items "weapons, drug paraphernalia, items appearing to be stolen, and evidence of a crime". 
Its not clear how an item would appear to be stolen or appear to be evidence of a crime.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/6.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/6a.pdf

### Item 7

Approving directions to City Manager when implementing an ordinance prohibiting
sleeping and camping on public property:

(A) Work with shelter operators, discuss current shelter practices and policies, and
identify ways to reduce barriers to emergency shelter use.
(B) Establish an agreement with an animal services provider to shelter animals of
unhoused individuals in Des Moines while individuals seek emergency shelter.
(C) Identify secured personal storage options for unhoused individuals.
(D) Establish a process making transportation available from campsites to emergency
shelter for individuals interested in entering emergency shelter. 

Council Directions suggesting City Manager should "assist in reducing perceived and actual barriers for people to use emergency shelters"

Item is vague and does not go into affect (its just a suggestion to the manager). While other items are rushed through in a single vote (instead of at 3 meetings as is the norm) this item shows the city is slow walking any semblance of assistance to homeless people.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/7.pdf

### Item 8

Ordinance amending Sections 18-4 and 18-136 of the Municipal Code relating to
agricultural nondomestic animals and exotic animals and the types permitted.

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/8.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/8a.pdf

## Agenda

1.
ROLL CALL:

2.
APPROVING AGENDA, AS PRESENTED AND/OR, AS AMENDED:

3.
Approving Alcoholic Beverage License Applications for the following:

RENEWAL APPLICATIONS
(A) BEECHWOOD LOUNGE
416 E WALNUT ST

Class C Liquor
(B) DRAKE UNIVERSITY
2615 CARPENTER AVE
Special Class C
(C) DRAKE UNIVERSITY
2875 UNIVERSITY AVE

Class C Liquor
(D) HY VEE FAST & FRESH #5 1113 E ARMY POST RD

Class E Liquor
(E) HY-VEE FAST FRESH #4
4701 FLEUR DR


Class E Liquor
(F) THAI FLAVORS

1254 E 14TH ST
Special Class C

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/3.pdf

4.
City Clerk to issue Cigarette/Tobacco/Nicotine/Vapor Permits.

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/4.pdf

5.
Ordinance amending Sections 102-8, 102-615 and 3-23 of the Municipal Code relating to
abandoned property and the removal of encroachments.

(A) Final consideration of ordinance above (waiver requested by Scott Sanders, City
Manager), requires six votes.

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/5.pdf

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/5a.pdf

6.
Ordinance amending Chapter 102 of the Municipal Code relating to prohibited camping.

(A) Final consideration of ordinance above (waiver requested by Scott Sanders, City
Manager), requires six votes

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/6.pdf

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/6a.pdf

7.
Approving directions to City Manager when implementing an ordinance prohibiting
sleeping and camping on public property:

(A) Work with shelter operators, discuss current shelter practices and policies, and
identify ways to reduce barriers to emergency shelter use.
(B) Establish an agreement with an animal services provider to shelter animals of
unhoused individuals in Des Moines while individuals seek emergency shelter.
(C) Identify secured personal storage options for unhoused individuals.
(D) Establish a process making transportation available from campsites to emergency
shelter for individuals interested in entering emergency shelter. 

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/7.pdf

8.
Ordinance amending Sections 18-4 and 18-136 of the Municipal Code relating to
agricultural nondomestic animals and exotic animals and the types permitted.

(A) Final consideration of ordinance above (waiver requested by Scott Sanders, City
Manager), requires six votes.

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/8.pdf

https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240722/8a.pdf

## Notes

- TBD
