# Work Session

- **Date:** July 22, 2024
- **Time:** 7:30am "immediately following the continued meeting"
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/2024/20240722CouncilWorkSession.pdf)
- [Details](https://www.dsm.city/citycouncil_detail_T60_R2896.php)
- [YouTube](https://youtube.com/live/0Scm0BpUE-s)

## Attention

This meeting violates Iowa Code 21.4 Public notice, which requires meetings to give notice of the "time, date, and place" of open meetings.

There is no time listed for the start of this meeting, instead it is listed as "immediately following the continued [7:30am] meeting"

## Topics

- [Encroachment Cleanups and Prohibited Camping](https://www.dsm.city/document_center/City%20Clerk/Work%20Sessions/2024/Encroachment%20Policy%20Presentation%20July_22_2024.pdf)
- Upcoming Topics:
    - Upcoming Topics
    - Neighborhood Associations Update
    - Youth Advisory Board (YAB) Update
    - Engage DSM
    - Tax Abatement Update
    - Lower Fourmile Creek Greenway Master Plan 

## Notes

- Voss Remote
- Malcolm Hankins presenting at start
- Sanders still absent
- Dalton Jacobis speaks from Neighborhood Services
- Involves Neighborhood Services, Public Works, Police, Fire
- camp clearing quoted as $150,872 since March 2024, but much higher number given elsewhere
- said "because of the moratorium we didn't start til around late Feb, early March"
- a lot of "usually we do ___", suggesting they sometimes just don't follow their own rules (we know this is true but its an odd admission)
- old ordinance had storage for 90 days, new ordinance has it for 30 days. For some reason, city staff claims this has gone from 0 to 30, which is a lie.
    - they also cannot describe plan for storage in accordance with ordinance
- Boesen and Coleman give weird fake commitment to not enforce until "council directives" are met, clearly not binding and they lie
- they are hiring an administrative judge for this, to speed up hearings... I didn't see that in ordinance but may have missed it
- they are dropping / delaying other services to cover this (such as vacant property registry work)
- staff was asked to shorten the time frame, so went from 10 to 3 days, limited by "due process concerns", but could not cite any model or reason for 3
- Coleman texting and talking to audience during this Work Session
- city would "like" to have service info offered at the moment, but don't want to gurantee it... oh brother
- Proposed ordinance explicitly modelled after Grant's Pass
- RAGBRAI given as an example... bizarre. "teenagers camping on levee". what? that's not what anyone is talking about.
- Attorney says sleeping ban does not include parks
- Some of this work will be handled by neighborhood works / public works staff [clip](https://youtu.be/0Scm0BpUE-s?t=1023)
    - this means some work (like vacant property registry) will be reduced to make time for this
- for "Affirmative Defense" Coleman has invented to avoid the $50 fine, the homeless people need to lawyer up after they get a citation
    - they have to "prove" after the fact that it is impracticable to take shelter
- Mayor Boesen cuts off Mandelbaum from asking questions about community service, saying they can be discussed later [clip](https://youtu.be/0Scm0BpUE-s?t=2639)
    - this is not the first time Boesen has insisted that public discussion of a topic was not appropriate when Mandelbaum was speaking. It is unclear when she thinks discussion of agenda items is appropriate.
- Mandelbaum asks how this will be enforced. It is no longer complaint-based, the city will issue on its own. So is the city going to send out people to find the ~150 people sleeping outside every night and give them citations? Other councillors say that is not the intent.
    - Coleman gets very mad about this and throws a tantrum, the audience laughs at his tantrum
    - Coleman wants to drive "respect for rule of order"
    - Mandelbaum and Coleman discuss back and forth, Boesen cuts them both off and closes the work session. 
    - Beyond ending a normal discussion during a discussion time, this is bizarre... there is a way to adjourn they didn't follow (Rule 42)
