# Regular Meeting

- **Date:** August 19, 2024
- **Time:** 5:00pm
    - Proclamations @ 4:50pm
        - Latino Heritage Month
        - Labor Union Appreciation Month
- **Place:** DSM City Hall
- [Agenda](https://councildocs.dsm.city/agendas/ag20240916.pdf)
- [Corrections](https://councildocs.dsm.city/corrections/20240916%20cap.pdf)
- [Details](https://www.dsm.city/citycouncil_detail_T60_R2924.php)
- [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWdkAfg6DYs)
- [Minutes](https://councildocs.dsm.city/minutes/as20240916.pdf?pdf=Minutes&t=1727152873243)

## Notes

- Meeting recording starts after meeting has already began (in the midst of one of the proclamations)
- Room is full at the start of the meeting, with people in overflow. Due to the anti-homeless ordinance, the City has added extra DMPD officers to the meeting and lowered the capacity of council chambers. There are also some anti-homeless seat fillers in the audience.
- In overflow, there is a lag between the meeting and the video that plays on a screen. The audio from the screen is hardly audible, and there are no closed captions.
- Looks like about 90 people in attendance, one of the more packed meetings
- Boesen opens meeting with a statement about gun violence over the past weekend, including a police shooting. This was not on the agenda.
- Consent Notes:
    - 5 Voss No (tobacco)
    - 50 Coleman Speak (Home Investment Partnership Program, $400,000, for 40 affordable rental units)
    - 51 Mandelbaum Abstains (related to a multi-level parking structure at East Court ave and East 2nd Street)
- Hearing Item 74, some discussion with applicant
    - City pushes on covered dumpsters, trees, and fencing
    - This item is in Mandelbaum's Ward (3) but Gatto is the one pushing on it. This goes against council's norms.
        - Gatto often oversteps on items in Mandelbaum's Ward. This is in part because Gatto actually lives in Ward 3.
    - quibbling over a nightshift
    - project almost gets delayed by council quibbling, instead the council takes a soft commitment
- Item 50
    - Coleman talks about affordable housing, really trying to brag about project that isn't complete, and says more will come... years later
- Item 69, first homeless ban piece. [clip](https://youtu.be/MWdkAfg6DYs?t=1728)
    - Coleman starts speech. really bizarre stuff. Kicks off saying his number one goal is helping the homeless get shelter.
        - Weird talk of "great city" and how we can't be a "great city" with visible homelessness. If not fascist, its one step away.
        - People loudly scoffing at his bizarre comments
        - Coleman wants "final action" tonight
        - Coleman and Boesen coordinated to add some more items to this, but its sloppy and doesn't make sense.
        - Most of the directives Coleman talks about are not currently met, and do not currently have any sort of end in sight.
        - Coleman says they want to provide "better and more reliable" transportation between camps and services. This phrasing is bizarre... the City is using police for this, not buses
        - Coleman says that the Outreach workers will be the "first point of contact" (instead of police) but its very clear this is just an idea, not going to practically happen based on the ordinance
        - Coleman adds another item "Housing Problem Solving Fund (Diversion Fund)", to direct the City Manager to reallocate $50,000 to create a broad fund for homeless outreach. Very clear this was thrown together with a lot of random ideas from the community and is not really targetted or thought through.
            - Also no word on where this reallocated funding would come from
            - Will be directed to a nonprofit to manage (so no public control)
            - Coleman says that Sanders recommended that Coleman add this... that's bizarre. Sanders recommended Coleman direct him to do something he already has the power to do?
    - Boesen also has items to add, they don't even have a visual for them because they're so thrown together last minute
       - Boesen wants to "look into" pallet homes geared towards "families, seniors, and the LGBTQ population that sometimes has problems with congregate setting"
       - Changing the ordinance so that churches can use their parking lots to allow people to camp and "that would enable them to open their facilities for warming location and cooling expectations, that is if they agree to some cities have done that also and I know we've had an outreach"
           - "we're going to see about changing that ordinance"
       -  "work to find" a designated campsite for temporary camp on a short term basis, working with our "area community" (pushing things to other cities)
    - Gatto disrupts and goes on tirade about "half naked men and women in the woods"
    - Mandelbaum speaks
       - calls attention to the fact that the items Coleman and Boesen want to add have had no public notice and have not been published in any way
       - city attorney says some of this hasn't even run by him. attorney notes that these items are just giving direction to the manager, in some cases where he already has authority. (they aren't really binding)
       - Mandelbaum wants to know where the dollars are going from, and says $50,000 doesn't go very far (this is nothing in the city's budget). original recommendation was $100,000, this is half that.
       - Points out in all the time and conversation, a lot of pieces of this still haven't been discussed.
       - Has lots of concerns about transparency and how these things will work in practice
       - Points there is no way to measure or track the things council is moving forward. All vague.
       - Mandelbaum says outreach workers may provide transportation
       - Mandelbaum says the restrooms are designed to fail, using temporary port a potties in secluded spots
       - talks about how temporary the directives are, while the ordinance is ongoing
       - talks about criminal history as a barrier to housing, which these ordinances create
       - Mandelbaum says the Gaps Analysis has never been presented to council. Says they could've done this but instead cancelled a work session on August 19. They had a presentation prepared. Boesen and Gatto try to lie about this but aren't even fully on mic.
       - Mandelbaum says the Pallet Home system with services under discussion would be an operating budget of about $1,500,000 a year.
           - Boesen is very mad that Mandelbaum disclosed this. Says she thinks she can lower price. Gatto mad too.
           - Mandelbaum says they have had multiple meetings about this (they weren't public meetings)
           - Boesen says she is giving the directive to the city manager to "look into it more"
           - Most of cost is utilities, according to Gatto
           - Mandelbaum says he wishes they were having these conversations before final reading 
       - Mandelbaum says they should pass encroachment piece and wait on the sleeping ban since it is clearly still a work in progress
       - Mandlebaum wants to know what the outreach workers will be doing. Not sure what the point of outreach is if there aren't services to connect with.
           - Note that the outreach is $325,000 / year and the housing fund is just $50,000 once
       - notes this isn't transparent and isn't maximizing the city's impact
       - months in, still avoiding discussion
    - Coleman says he wants to do this all in one piece... but he's recommending this be split into more pieces? His own story doesn't make sense
       - says we need to get people off the "unhealthy and dangerous streets of Des Moines" [clip](https://youtu.be/MWdkAfg6DYs?t=3464)
    - Simonson talks briefly, votes NO
    - Voss, Westergaard silent.
    - Shouts of Shame & Boo after item passes, then more out in the overflow room.
- Item 70, sleeping ban
    - Mandelbaum speaks
        - asks about ordinance language. Much is undefined, being determined by city staff ongoing, or not measureable
        - talks about "space unavailable" language, points out it isn't in line with how the services/shelters operate
        - talks about fine being lowered is beyond the point, the problem is the criminal infraction which creates a barrier to housing, its not about the amount of the fine
        - says we are criminalizing sleeping outdoors. Boesen and Gatto disrupt him to argue about this. Gatto isn't even on mic.
        - After Boesen disrupts, she is then annoyed that things are derailed
        - References Sotomayors dissent in Grant's Pass
        - Directly says they are criminalizing homelessness
    - Boesen speaks, says she wants to leave the details up to City Staff (Sanders)
        - claims we are hearing from both sides. Bizarre, the vast majority are against this. Literal 1000s have signed a petition against it.
    - Sanders makes odd comments trying to quip back at Mandelbaum and provide numbers to muddy the waters 
    - When item passes, people in chambers boo and shout. After lag of video feed, loud boos and noise from the overflow room ongoing. Boesen continues conducting meeting through it.
        - shouts of shame, Boesen stops and says "if anybody would like to leave you can do so now"
        - "if anybody wants to continue to disrupt the meeting you are more than welcome to leave" 
        - Boesen is clearly frazzled by people ... just shouting. Bizarre how shaken she is, she clearly expected this or for actual disruption.
        - She seems to be attempting to give some sort of trespass notice like Cownie did but instead she is just making quips? 
- Item 77
    - Mandelbaum asks the Manager when to expect this to move since the ordinance is now in effect
    - Boesen disrupts and claims the ordinance is not in effect until all the things come forward (whatever that means)
    - Gatto makes odd comment off mic like "Josh, you know when its in effect"
    - Mandelbaum has to point out, yes the ordinance is in effect, they passed it
- Item 78
    - Someone came to speak, they start to allow then block it. Very odd treatment like they're trying to make someone mad. Quickly gets derailed by their refusal to hear a comment.
    - Westergaard talking off mic
    - Person they blocked from speaking is supported by audience. Speaker says he thinks council "needs some rough meetings" if they're going to be blocking comments
- Item 79, public comment
    - Gatto immediately leaves at start of public comment. first speaker says she wants to wait until Gatto comes back to give comment. Boesen says her "2 minutes" are starting... but we have 3 minutes. Bizarre, as usual council doesn't know their own rules.
    - audience chants for Joe to come back
    - 8 speakers against ordinance, 8 speakers missed (rollover adds to this...), 2 others. (None PRO ordinance)
- Other notes
    - Extra cops, some standing between overflow and council chambers. During public comment, one staring down speakers
    - Westergaard and Boesen used DMPD police escorts to go to their cars
    - CISS Ceo was waiting in her car after the meeting, Coleman went up and talked to her (presumably being thanked)
    - Man in plaid tan jacket oddly timing speakers and making lots of odd gestures, mouthing things to council

## Highlighted Items & More

### Closed Session at 4:00pm

Recess, and reconvene in closed session pursuant to Section 21.5, subsection 1,
paragraph C, of the Iowa Code, to discuss as necessary strategy with counsel in
matters that are presently in litigation or where litigation is imminent, where its
disclosure would be likely to prejudice or disadvantage the position of the City.

### Consent Item 19 // Bulk Tax Abatements, $2,065,000

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/19.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2024/24-352.pdf

### Consent Item 40 // Legal Settlement to Nieters, $100,000

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/40.pdf
- https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/crime-and-courts/2024/08/22/des-moines-settles-photographers-2020-protest-lawsuit-for-100k/74860348007/

This case involved DMPD attacking and arresting a journalist during a 2020 protest.

### Consent Item 41 // Legal Payment to plaintiffs in Dunn v. City of Des Moines, $800,000

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/41.pdf
- https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/crime-and-courts/2024/09/12/des-moines-settles-floyd-protest-claims-with-14-plaintiffs-for-800k/75163979007/

This case involved several 2020 protestors who were arrested and sued the City.

### Consent Item 51 // New Parking Structure in East Village, 249 spots

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/51.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2024/24-378.pdf
- https://urbandsm.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=6435

Another large (private) parking garage in the East Village near the old Federal Courthouse.
Somehow this project is connected to the Mandelbaum family. (Mandelbaum abstained without comment.)

There is already tons of parking here, this further puts the city against public transit options.

### Consent Item 57 // DMPD Traffic Safety Grant, $246,000

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/57.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2024/24-353.pdf

Includes:

- $209,000 in Overtime for Special Enforcement
- $29,600 in Equipment related to special enforcement
- $3,000 in Public educational programs
- $5,000 in Training for Officers

### Consent Item 62 // Des Moines Airport Authority Services with DMPD

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/62.pdf

Agreement between the City and the Airport, contains a lot of DMPD staffing and pay items.

### Consent Item 64 // DMPD Equipment, $141,332.60

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/64.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2024/24-355.pdf

Equipment for 911 call-taking and processing

### Item 69 // Encroachment Removal final reading

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/69.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/rollcalls/2024/24-1277.pdf

Related to the City's effort to criminalize homelessness.


### Item 70 // Camping Ban final reading

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/70.pdf

Related to the City's effort to criminalize homelessness.

### Item 77 // Agreements with Primary Healthcare for Homeless Outreach Services

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/77.pdf

References services:

- Street outreach services
- Connection to Centralized Intake
- Referral to community resources
- Limited transportation
- Basic needs

Outreach services from 7am to 7pm six days per week for 2 years at a max of $325,000 per year

Involves the Downtown Des Moines Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District and Operation Downtown

### Item 77-I // Agreement with Polk County for mental health and substance abuse services

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/77i.pdf

### Item 79 // Amendments to Code regarding Maintenance and blighted property

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/79.pdf
- https://councildocs.dsm.city/communications/2024/24-374.pdf

### Item 80 // 20 public speakers (max)

- https://councildocs.dsm.city/resolutions/20240916/80.pdf
